Current Biology Vol 21 No 2
R62
and differed in traits other than primary 
sexual characters, the differences 
were probably due to natural selection. 
Furthermore, whenever a trait is 
developed for “the general purposes 
of life” this is also due to natural 
selection. If, however, a trait provides 
an advantage over a rival in securing 
a mate, then it is subject to sexual 
selection. Darwin also suggested 
that many characters are likely to be 
exposed to both forms of selection 
and that it will often be difficult to 
distinguish between the two. But 
although difficult, the distinction is still 
useful conceptually and operationally, 
and when talking about the sum of 
these two mechanisms of evolution, 
selection (or net selection) should 
be used as an umbrella term to 
incorporate both natural and sexual 
selection and distinguish them from 
neutral processes that cause organic 
evolution (such as genetic drift).
Sexual selection is not a 
subcategory of natural selection, as 
Darwin made very clear: it arises from 
differences in mating success, whereas 
natural selection is due to variance 
in all other fitness components. This 
simple delineation comes closest to 
Darwin’s concepts and distinctions. 
What Darwin apparently did not clearly 
Sexual selection 
David J. Hosken  
and Clarissa M. House
Sexual selection is a concept that has 
probably been misunderstood and 
misrepresented more than any other 
idea in evolutionary biology, confusion 
that continues to the present day. We 
are not entirely sure why this is, but 
sexual politics seems to have played 
its role, as does a failure to understand 
what sexual selection is and why it was 
initially invoked. While in some ways 
less intuitive than natural selection, 
sexual selection is conceptually 
identical to it, and evolution via 
either mechanism will occur given 
sufficient genetic variation. Recent 
claims that sexual selection theory 
is fundamentally flawed are simply 
wrong and ignore an enormous body 
of evidence that provides a bedrock of 
support for this major mechanism  
of organic evolution. In fact it is partly 
due to this solid foundation that 
current research has largely shifted 
from documenting whether or not 
sexual selection occurs, to addressing 
more complex evolutionary questions.
What is sexual selection?
Sexual selection is Darwin’s second 
great insight, and he defined it as 
depending on “the advantage which 
certain individuals have over other 
individuals of the same sex and species 
solely in respect of reproduction”. So 
sexual selection can be thought of as 
intra-specific reproductive competition. 
While some have suggested 
distinguishing between sexual and 
natural selection is worthless, Darwin 
made the distinction clearly, cogently 
and for good reason — he was trying 
to explain the existence of characters 
that were apparently not favoured by 
natural selection (Figure 1). He says, 
for example, that sexual selection 
“depends not on the struggle for 
existence, but on the struggle between 
males for possession of females.” 
Statements like this have been 
(mis)interpreted by some as implying 
that Darwin was not aware of female 
reproductive competition, but this is 
clearly not the case.
Darwin suggested that when males 
and females had different “habits”, 
Primer
appreciate, however, is that sexual 
selection is often stronger than natural 
selection, as it frequently drives trait 
values beyond their naturally selected 
optima. Furthermore, this occurs even 
though sexual selection largely acts 
on only half the population (usually 
males), a situation that has been 
referred to as the quantitative paradox 
of sexual selection. 
The solution to this apparent 
paradox is that the variance in male 
reproductive success is typically 
very large, meaning that sexual 
selection can be strong. It is important 
to remember that the variance in 
reproductive success is a measure of 
the potential for sexual selection and 
need not imply that any selection is 
occurring — the variance in sexual 
fitness may be random with respect 
to trait values, which of course means 
no selection. To establish a trait is 
subject to sexual selection, a clear link 
between it and mating success needs 
to be made (see below). Nonetheless, 
potential and realized selection on 
male traits is often very strong, with 
many male characters subject to 
sexual selection. This includes male 
body size, display rate or display size, 
and is why male mammals are often 
larger than females, for example. 
Figure 1. Examples of conspicuous sexually selected characters. 
These can be display traits used to attract females and/or weapons used in male–male com-
bat. Shown here (clockwise from top left) are: the plumage of a male sunbird; the exaggerated 
sword of a male sword-tailed fish; the horns of a male chameleon; and the enlarged eye-stalks 
of a male stalk-eyed fly. Images courtesy of Mhairi McFarlane, Nick Royle, Jan Stipala and Sam 
Cotton, respectively.
Magazine
R63
Darwin also erroneously suggested 
that “promiscuous intercourse” will 
“prevent or check the action of sexual 
selection”. We now know that females 
of most species mate with multiple 
males and when this occurs there 
can be a shift in the focus of sexual 
selection to the post-copulatory 
arena, resulting in the evolution of 
exaggerated reproductive traits in 
males, such as testis mass. Post-
copulatory sexual selection is also 
a major driver of the evolution of 
the male intromittent organ, and 
probably sperm form too, but how it 
affects net sexual selection on males 
is more debatable. Variance in male 
mating success still appears to be the 
strongest determinant of the strength 
of sexual selection because if a male 
does not mate, he will not take part in 
post-copulatory sexual selection.
The mechanisms of sexual selection
Darwin provided two mechanisms 
of sexual selection: mate choice 
and competition for mates. While 
acknowledging that males can be 
choosy and females competitive, it is 
typically females that are more choosy 
and males that are more competitive, 
so as a first approximation, mate 
choice is female mate choice and 
competition is male–male competition 
for mates. The logic of this was 
fleshed-out by Trivers, although 
Fisher in letters to A.J. Batemen had 
noted that sexual selection should 
be stronger on males because their 
fitness is limited by access to females. 
In any case, Darwin’s 
contemporaries, and those that 
followed, readily accepted male–male 
mate competition as a mechanism of 
sexual selection, probably because 
male–male competition was so 
obvious, but female choice was 
controversial, and confusion about 
female preference/choice continues to 
this day. The initial controversy might 
be partly because Darwin did not really 
explain why females might have one 
preference over another, or why they 
would continue to prefer males with 
exaggerated sexual traits. Instead, 
Darwin took female preference as a 
given, and although he did hint that 
preference could evolve, he at times 
attributed female choice to higher 
mental faculties. 
All this led to the rejection of female 
mate choice, often through arguments 
of incredulity: “… it is absurd to credit 
birds with aesthetic tastes equal, if 
not superior, to those of the most 
refined and civilized human beings.” 
Darwin anticipated these arguments 
against female preference, saying that 
preference did not depend on a sense 
of beauty, but only on females being 
able to discriminate amongst males, 
so rejection of female preference on 
this basis represents a fundamental 
misunderstanding of choice and 
preference in sexual selection. For 
example, females do not have to be 
actively choosing: if they only mate 
on a certain tree, then there will be 
selection against any male who is not 
also on the tree. This does not require 
any higher female cognition, merely 
that because of something females do, 
some male phenotypes do well and 
others do poorly.
Sexual selection was also dealt a 
savage blow by Julian Huxley, who 
either did not read Darwin, or did 
not understand what he had read. 
He said for example “Darwin further 
failed to draw a general distinction 
between interspecific and intraspecific 
selection, although in sexual selection, 
as defined by him, he gave the first 
example of intraspecific selection 
promoting individual success without 
advantage to the type”, and further, 
“display may often be of advantage 
to the species ….. and any resultant 
selection will therefore come under 
the head of Natural Selection”. It is 
abundantly clear from these quotes 
that Huxley fundamentally failed 
to understand Darwin’s message, 
but many, including Lack, accepted 
his criticisms, and sexual selection 
entered a period of torpor. So much 
so that it did not figure in the Modern 
Synthesis. 
Fisher was the next major figure to 
turn his attention to sexual selection, 
with a short section in his classic 
The Genetical Theory of Natural 
Selection. His work explained the 
establishment, spread and persistence 
of female preference, and so filled a 
gap in Darwin’s original thesis. Fisher 
imagined a male trait that was initially 
favoured by natural selection. Any 
female that paid attention to that 
character would have higher fitness 
as her offspring would inherit the trait, 
but also the tendency to pay attention 
to the trait. Thus, the trait would 
come to have a naturally selected 
advantage and an extra advantage 
via female preference, which would 
be proportional to the strength of 
preference, and both preference 
and trait would spread through 
the population because of this. As 
Fisher stated “Whenever appreciable 
differences exist in a species, which 
are in fact correlated with selective 
advantage, there will be a tendency 
to select also those individuals of 
the opposite sex which most clearly 
discriminate the difference to be 
observed” and this can lead to the 
evolution of male trait and female 
preference. 
Fisher’s fundamental insights were 
essentially ignored. In fact it was not 
until some 50 years later that Lande 
showed that Fisher’s logic was correct, 
and that accelerating evolution of 
preference and trait could occur when 
the strength of natural selection on 
the male trait was relatively weak 
and the genetic correlation between 
female preference and male trait 
was relatively strong (Figure 2). This 
work by Lande, together with the 
insights of Trivers and others, was 
largely responsible for the enormous 
explosion in sexual selection research 
that has occurred after the early 1970s. 
Sexual selection via female choice 
and male–male competition has now 
been documented in many species, 
and sex-role reversal, where females 
compete and males are choosy, is also 
well documented. 
Choice for what?
While it is clear why males are 
competing — they need females (or 
more strictly their eggs) to secure 
fitness — what is in it for females? The 
benefits of female choice have been 
discussed widely and subject to much 
research. They are broadly divided 
into direct benefits, increased female 
fecundity or lifespan, for example, and 
indirect benefits, some increase in the 
quality of offspring. This quality can 
be sexual quality, more attractive sons 
(Fisher’s effect), or general viability 
(good genes). 
Theory has largely focused on 
indirect benefits perhaps because if 
benefits are direct, there is not a lot 
left to say — females increase their 
fecundity by mating with specific 
males, q.e.d. — and Lande’s model 
assumed no direct selection on 
preference. This may, however, 
have inadvertently placed too much 
emphasis on the importance of indirect 
benefits, and empirically there is 
evidence that direct benefits of choice 
can be very important. With that in 
mind, some of the most vigorous 
Current Biology Vol 21 No 2
R64
debate has been over the importance 
of good genes (for viability) and 
Fisher’s (attractiveness) sons’ effect as 
indirect benefits of choice. 
Part of the problem is that good 
genes benefits include a sons’ effect 
(as explained by Fisher) and with 
females exercising some preference, 
male traits will be dragged past their 
naturally selected optima, so there will 
be a viability cost to exaggerated sexual 
traits. Furthermore, if male fitness is 
enhanced more by marginal investment 
in sexual traits than survival, any positive 
link between the size of a male sexual 
trait and male viability will also be lost. 
Additionally, intra-locus sexual conflict, 
sexual differences in optimal trait values, 
may mean good genes for a male 
phenotype are not good genes for a 
female phenotype, and finally, inter-locus 
sexual conflict, the divergence of male 
and female reproductive interests, can 
generate direct negative selection on 
female preference. 
So, in spite of claims that all sexual 
selection must be inevitably linked 
to good genes, this need not be the 
case. We also note here that “sexy 
sons”, which is often confused with 
Fisher’s effect, is in fact the idea that 
females can compensate for direct 
negative selection on preferences — by 
mating with preferred males females 
produce fewer offspring — through 
the attractiveness of their sons. This 
idea has little theoretical support, 
while Fisher’s sons’ effect can lead  
to bouts of accelerating evolution of 
trait and preference. 
Measuring sexual selection
This is another area that has been 
subject to considerable debate. In fact, 
Grafen asked why we should even 
bother to measure sexual selection 
at all? The crux of his question was 
that Darwin’s fundamental insight 
required no measurement of selection, 
plus seeing no sexual selection on a 
character now does not mean it was 
not under sexual selection in the past. 
There are a number of reasonable 
answers to this query, the most 
pertinent being that by assessing 
selection now, we can infer recent-past 
and near-future evolution (if we also 
know something about the genetics 
involved, because selection does not 
always result in evolution). 
Measuring current sexual selection 
is in principle easy, and a framework 
for doing this was established over  
25 years ago by Lande, Arnold and 
Wade. This approach builds on the 
simple principle that the selection 
operating on a phenotypic trait 
can be measured by the statistical 
relationship between the trait and 
fitness. Lande and Arnold referred 
to this relationship as a selection 
gradient, and further showed that the 
mathematical form of the selection 
gradient tells us how the trait 
distribution will change with selection 
(assuming there is sufficient genetic 
variation for the trait in the direction of 
selection), thus providing a useful way 
of characterizing the type of selection 
targeting a trait. 
In the simplest case, the 
relationship between the size of a 
sexual trait and mating success is 
linear, and hence the sign of the 
selection gradient indicates whether 
sexual selection favours an increase 
or decrease in trait size. This will in 
turn result in an increase or decrease 
in mean trait expression, with the 
magnitude of this change determined 
by the slope of the selection gradient 
and the heritable genetic variation 
for the trait. However, selection 
can also be nonlinear in form. If the 
relationship between trait and mating 
success is concave down, sexual 
selection will be stabilizing in form 
and individuals expressing traits 
close to the population mean will 
have the highest fitness. Conversely, 
if the relationship is concave up, 
sexual selection will be disruptive in 
form and individuals with traits at the 
extremes of the distribution will have 
the highest fitness. 
Current Biology
Line of neutral
equilibria
Lines of motion
Average size of
male trait
Average strength
of female
preference  
  
Figure 2. A diagram illustrating Lande’s model of the Fisher process. 
Male trait size (the red tail of the cartoon bird) is plotted on the x-axis and female preference for the 
male tail is on the y-axis. The dotted line (labelled Q) represents the naturally selected optimal tail 
size, and female preference tends to move the tail beyond this size. The solid black line (the line 
of neutral equilibria) represents a balance between natural and sexual selection, and when these 
two are equal, there is no net selection on tail size. The slope of this line depends on the strength 
of natural and sexual selection on tail size. If, for example, female preference is strong and stere-
otyped and natural selection against exaggerated tail size is weak, the slope will be relatively 
shallow. The red dotted lines (lines of motion) represent the evolutionary trajectories of a popula-
tion, with the precise trajectory followed being determined by the population’s starting point. The 
slope of the lines of motion is determined by the genetic correlation between male trait and female 
preference. Shown here is the case when the genetic covariance is relatively strong — the lines of 
motion have a relatively steep slope — and the line of equilibrium has a relatively shallow slope. 
This corresponds to Fisher’s runaway, where populations evolve away from the line of equilibria. 
Note that above the line of equilibria, larger tails evolve and below it, smaller tails. Redrawn from 
Arnold (1983) in Bateson, P. (ed) Mate Choice (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge).
Magazine
R65
Based on these criteria, measuring 
sexual selection is, in principle, 
relatively simple: collect a sample of 
mating and non-mating males from a 
population, measure their phenotype 
and quantify the relationship between 
phenotype and mating success. 
Unfortunately, however, predicting 
evolutionary responses based on 
assessment of sexual selection is 
problematic for a number of reasons. 
This includes Grafen’s complaint —  
failure to detect selection now does 
not mean there was not selection in 
the past (or future) — but additionally, 
because different traits are nearly 
always correlated with each other 
(either at the phenotypic or genetic 
level) and selection rarely focuses on 
a single trait at a time, responses to 
selection can differ markedly from 
simple expectations. 
This is illustrated perfectly by the 
fact that sexual selection can also be 
correlational in form if the covariance 
between two traits influences mating 
success. This may occur, for example, 
if two colours on a male bird’s plumage 
are preferred most by females when 
they occur together. This highlights 
the simple fact that sexual selection 
is a multivariate process. This means 
that measuring the sexual selection 
acting on a given trait is slightly more 
complicated, as a technique is required 
that enables the direct selection acting 
on a trait to be separated from the 
indirect selection operating on it (via 
correlations), as well as linear and 
nonlinear selection gradients to be 
measured independently. 
Lande and Arnold showed how 
some of these issues could in 
principle be solved using multiple 
regression analysis. By building a 
regression model that includes the 
suite of correlated male sexual traits 
as predictor variables and mating 
success as the response variable, 
the linear selection gradient for one 
trait can be estimated when the 
effects of all other correlated traits are 
held constant. Moreover, by adding 
quadratic terms for each trait and 
the covariance between each pair of 
traits to this linear model, nonlinear 
selection gradients can be estimated 
when the effects of linear selection 
are removed. An additional benefit of 
this approach is that, when the traits 
are standardized and mating success 
made relative prior to analysis, the 
selection gradients are directly 
comparable across studies using 
organisms with very different sexual 
traits. 
Numerous researchers have 
taken advantage of this to address 
fundamental questions such as what 
is the strength of sexual selection 
in natural populations? A myriad 
other statistical approaches have 
more recently been developed to 
help simplify the interpretation of 
nonlinear selection, which can become 
complicated when more than a few 
traits are being examined, as well 
as to formally compare selection 
gradients amongst different ‘groups’ 
(such as populations or the sexes). 
These approaches have been used 
to address more complex questions 
such as whether current patterns 
of multivariate sexual selection can 
explain the evolutionary divergence 
of male sexual traits observed across 
populations and what the relative 
importance of sexual selection, 
genetics and drift are to this process.
Where to now?
For much of its early history 
researchers had to collate evidence 
for sexual selection, and establish that 
females (or males) were in fact choosy 
and that the outcome of reproductive 
competition was determined by 
an individuals’ phenotype. All this 
established the fundamental truth of 
Darwin’s hypothesis, but there are 
many areas that still require research 
and new vistas have appeared as older 
questions have been answered. 
One area that remains underexplored 
is female preference. There is a current 
paucity of information on female 
preference functions, their shape, 
whether there is genetic variation for 
them, and the costs of expressing 
different preferences. This gap restricts 
our understanding of the nature of 
sexual selection acting on male sexual 
traits and the evolution of female 
preference itself. Female reproductive 
competition is also an area that has 
received relatively little investigation 
and the realisation that sexual-signal 
honesty can be compromised by 
genotype-by-environment interactions 
also provides fertile ground for new 
empirical and theoretical research. 
We also do not have a clear 
understanding of the relative 
importance of sexual conflict and 
traditional sexual selection in driving 
trait evolution. Are females making 
rational mate choices or are they 
being coerced into choices that are 
not in their best interests? At this 
point in time we do not have clear 
answers to these questions. Even 
more fundamentally, it is currently not 
clear if sexual selection is adaptive 
or not. While Darwin invoked sexual 
selection to explain characters that 
were apparently not adaptive, he 
also suggested sexual selection 
could lead to the improvement of the 
breed or species, but as Fisher and 
Lande explained, sexual selection 
often drives traits from their naturally 
selected optima. Furthermore, if 
sexual selection inherently includes a 
conflict load, it is also not expected 
to be adaptive. At present we only 
have limited evidence bearing on this 
issue, and because it is only relatively 
recently that we have become aware 
that sexual selection is a general and 
potent driver of population divergence, 
this is an area ripe for additional work. 
These are just some issues that 
should gain more research time, 
and we should continue to apply 
the multiple regression approach 
to sexual selection while also 
being aware of the limitation of this 
approach. These include measuring 
selection and phenotypes accurately 
and meaningfully. Nevertheless, big 
unanswered questions remain for 
young researchers with an eye for 
detail, and reading Darwin is still a 
good place to start. 
Further reading
 Andersson, M., and Simmons, L.W. (2006). Sexual 
selection and mate choice. Trends Ecol. Evol. 21, 
298–302.
 Arnold, S.J., and Wade, M.J. (1984). On the 
measurement of natural and sexual selection: 
theory. Evolution 38, 709–719.
 Arnqvist, G., and Rowe, L. (2005). Sexual Conflict 
(Princeton University Press, Princeton).
 Bradbury, J.W., and Andersson, M. (eds) (1987) 
Sexual Selection: Testing the Alternatives (John 
Wiley & Sons, New York).
 Cameron, E., Day, T., and Rowe, L. (2003). Sexual 
conflict and indirect benefits. J. Evol. Biol. 16, 
1055–1060.
 Darwin, C. (1871). The Descent of Man and 
Selection in Relation to Sex (John Murray, 
London).
 Ingleby, F., Hunt, J., and Hosken, D.J. (2010). The 
role of genotype-by-environment interactions in 
sexual selection. J. Evol. Biol. 23, 2031–2045.
 Klug, H., Heuschelle, J., Jennions, M.D., and 
Kokko, H. (2010). The mismeasurement of sexual 
selection. J. Evol. Biol. 23, 447–462.
 Lande, R. (1981). Models of speciation by sexual 
selection on polygenic traits. Proc. Natl. Acad. 
Sci. USA 78, 3721–3725.
 Mead, L.S., and Arnold, S.J. (2004). Quantitative 
genetic models of sexual selection. Trends Ecol. 
Evol. 19, 264–271.
Centre for Ecology & Conservation, 
Biosciences, The University of Exeter, 
Cornwall Campus, Tremough, Penryn TR10 
9EZ, Cornwall, UK.  
E-mail: D.J.Hosken@exeter.ac.uk
